obligation is is in its Essence a form
of management so there's not only a not
letting it in there's a pushing a away
of it right things that we things don't
want to be managed you know like wow I
really like my wife because she manages
me you like it's not it's not something
that you hear very often and so if you
look at like the Long Haul of
relationships you know that like
everybody's walking on eggshells
everybody feels is obligated to do a
certain thing all the time so that they
can be loved and the marriage just the
the love
erodes all right so Joe there's there's
a common pattern that we see when we're
working with people that is around
obligation or
responsibility and just yesterday I saw
you work with somebody in a rapid fire
coaching session and handled this really
beautifully and I'd love to explore the
topic more
deeply yeah that sounds great
awesome yeah okay so I want to start
with a two-minute clip from yesterday's
coaching session hi hi
um yeah um you know I seem to be on the
cusp of everything I could want and hope
for um but oh great the patterns
of
obligation and
responsibility
probably intertwined with fear and a
scarcity mindset just seemed to get in
the way you know my specific question
would be around
uh why can't I finish up with a divorce
but the the same patterns apply
sometimes in work and everything else
and where does obligation sit in your
body chest
um great upper arm Ms feel it for a
minute and what happens if you're just
like if you see that
as the part of you that never got
loved
yep and love
it I can get to acceptance It's hard to
get to loving
it is that what you're doing every time
you accept responsibility for somebody
else you get to acceptance but you don't
actually get to love
them yeah I think that's that's where I
can accept myself I'm not sure I can get
to loving myself great so do me a favor
getting contact with the love that you
once had for your
wife if you maybe you still have some
yep yeah tell me when you feel
it hey
okay now I want you to feel responsible
for her
happiness that's easy what happened to
the
love disappear dissipated retreated deep
into a you you you you stopped loving
her to take responsibility for her is
what I'm hearing you
say [__] I never had it heard it
said that way I guess that's accurate my
first response would be is wait I don't
want to guess I want you to actually
feel it this is an emotional
experience so it's not a guess it's like
every time you took responsibility acted
out of
obligation it stopped the love that you
felt for her
yeah o wow yeah that's gonna be a great
topic I can't wait to discuss that for
anyone who wants to listen to the entire
episode or watch it there's a link to
the full session in the show
notes all right so tell me tell me Joe
about what you've what you've seen in
the pattern that people carry around
obligation responsibility and how does
that relate to
love yeah so so what I notice is if you
have a sense of obligation then uh a
requirement of that obligation is to
stop the emotional experience of love
doesn't mean you stop loving the person
but it means that your emotional
experience of loving someone has to end
the obligation literally constricts
um the emotional experience of love and
so every time we are acting out of
obligation we're saying hey I'm G to
trade obligation for
love okay I'm GNA I'm gonna feel I'm
gonna I'm gonna trade either um feel an
obligation to do something rather than
love myself or I'm going to feel an
obligation to do something for you
rather than love
you okay so so we've talked before about
how how we come into this world how
children are born hardwired for love and
so what what would cause us to go into
this pattern of trading love for
obligation yeah oddly it is a it becomes
a strategy to get love oh I've been
disconnected
so it I've been disconnected from you so
now I have to do something to try to get
the love
back right and so if you notice what I
said I said that the that the feeling of
Love gets cut off and then there's a
stagnation of of emot the emotion gets
cut off and it kind of therefore creates
a stagnation it's because obligation and
guilt obligation and shame are like very
closely
related so if I'm going to guilt you
it's to make you feel obligated to do
something if I shame you it's going to
make you feel an obligation to be a
certain way that's the whole idea behind
them is to to shove this obligation and
we've talked about in the podcast how
guilt and shame are the stagnant they
stagnate emotions yeah and so it's the
same thing here you're
basically that sense of obligation means
that there's been some guilt and shame
that is stagnating the experience but I
think the important thing to say here is
that one thing we're doing is that we're
differentiating between in the moment
and we're and over the long term meaning
this experience right now in this moment
I cannot feel obligation for you a to do
something for you and feel love for you
at the same time it doesn't mean that I
can't care for you it doesn't mean I
can't take care or we sorry it doesn't
mean that I can't care for you it
doesn't mean that I can't uh be generous
with you or a whole bunch of things but
but I can't do it out of obligation and
maintain this this feeling of Love
however I could feel a sense of
obligation as a strategy to get your
love or to feel your to feel love for
you at some point and so that that
happens all the time so that's that's
the distinction got it it's fascinating
I like how you connected that to the
shame because in one sense it could be
that obligation is like an internal
threat of
shame that yeah like the obligation is
the the threat that there will be shame
if I don't do what I feel oblig to do
and there's a way that that threat is a
fear and that you have that fear and
love Spectrum there where it's it's hard
to love something if you're afraid of it
or if you feel like it can dominate you
or withdraw love from you and hurt you
and that that would make you go into
shame yeah and also what also is
interesting about it
is if you are trying to prevent shame in
the future it means that you think that
you would do it which which means
there's already something wrong with you
that you're already ashamed like I'm I'm
not like okay I better not kill anybody
right like that's not like I'm not doing
that oh because I might be ashamed if I
kill somebody the things that we are
trying to prevent for shame are things
that we think about ourselves as true
and that are bad so it's kind of like
this with identity there yeah it's if we
have the identity of I'm bad or I'm
wrong or I'm selfish and that has been
that has been drilled into us for
for decades then then of course we're
going to be under the constant threat of
feeling
shame yeah yeah fascinating yeah exactly
so so that's so that's the pattern is
that we we go and we try sometimes we
have leared that obligation feeling of
obligation is going to get us the love
SL approval that we
want and but if you pay attention to the
moment it actually takes the Love Away
immediately yeah how how does that work
how how does it not get us the
love well it it might get us somebody
liking us or somebody approving of us or
somebody maybe even loving us they like
oh wow thank you so much for the Porsche
honey and then this person has this
feeling of like it actually does work
sometimes which is why we do it however
there is something like the it's always
kind of a watered down version of it
because somewhere in the back of our
mind
yeah or surrogate but because somewhere
in the back of our mind we know we had
to perform for it which means if we're
not getting loved for who we are we're
getting love for our performance so it
never fully fulfills it's it's never
like a wholesome meal at best it's like
a Pepsi you know yeah what's interesting
about that is that even even if we act
out of obligation in such a way that we
receive unconditional love from somebody
we won't be able to receive it as
unconditional because we already placed
all these conditions on it yeah and
performed for it so they couldn't
possibly actually love our authentic
expression they'd only be loving what
what we've presented and we've already
decided
that what is lovable in US is the
obligated part yeah exactly yeah you
don't love me you love me because I felt
obligated to do something yeah right
which is which the feeling of obligation
in some level is also a way to say I'm
doing something
inauthentic right if I feel obl ated to
do something it's like that means I'm
not going to do it naturally right why
would I feel obligated to breathe I have
to [__]
breathe yeah so the obligation is
essentially a mask another layer between
us and them that is in the way of that
connection or is just a longer path to
connection and the connection is more
fuzzy and distant through it um um uh I
think you can equivalently say it's in
the way of our connection is it it also
means that it's stops us from loving
yeah a very
similar which is very opposite to how
it's often viewed we often when we're in
the pattern of obligation we see that
the obligation is the only thing that's
maintaining our connection and we may
even internally justify it as it's an
intense form of love you know I I have
to do this because I love this person so
much and so what would you say would be
behind that kind of an
inversion it's again that we were taught
as kids that we were we were um we were
taught as kids that we had to do
something to be lovable right that's
that's where that comes from if somebody
was taught that they don't have to do
something to be lovable that they're
lovable just the way they are their
chances of feeling that sense of
obligation are far reduced their chances
of feeling guilt are far reduced or
shame is far reduced so so I think that
that's that's the main component of it I
think the other component of it is it's
like this this idea that we have and I
know I've said this on the podcast
before but the idea that we have that
there's some sort of differentiation
between doing what's best for me and
doing what's best for you and and that
somehow or another I have to make a
sacrifice to be a good friend or I have
to make a sacrifice to be uh to do the
right thing uh for you rather than
finding the thing that says oh this is
actually what I want it's actually
what's really deeply good for me and it
also corresponds to what's deeply good
for
you and and that false binary that we
have that it's one or the other is also
I think a a mental the mental uh
reflection of how people get lost in the
idea that I have to do something for
somebody I love yeah yeah so what I'm
seeing here now is that kind of two
aspects there's the there's the
obligation and there's the threat of
shame or the shame in the OB obligation
and then there's also our the confusion
of our concept of Love which we talked
about in another episode called how love
gets
confused yeah and we what we think is
love is a conditional form of love
whatever kind of love we were given and
what we were taught would make us
lovable and so then that becomes the
kind of love what we're seeking through
the obligation and again it's another
surrogate form of love it's something
that might
feel good on some level but it's
gratifying something to our identity
rather than who we really are yeah and
and just to be clear about this I'm
imagining somebody listening right now
and they're thinking oh my gosh if I I
have to not feel obligation for somebody
or I can't act out of obligation for I'm
not saying that like feel free feel free
to act out of obligation just notice
that you have to cut off your love to do
it just notice that you have to stop
loving the person to do
it that's all and so when let's say
somebody does this exploration and they
start to notice the places that they're
cutting off love what are what are some
of the places that this might show up
for them like how does this work in like
business or with money yeah yeah or
action sports
or in the rest of podcasting
[Laughter]
yeah yeah well I mean let's take let's
take money for instance like if somebody
feels like they have an obligation to
make money it doesn't allow you to love
money and there's like probably 20 heads
that just went like love money what the
[__] are you talking about Joe right
like and that's how much it entrenches
like how much money becomes like an
obligation because one of the things
about obligations in general is they're
oppressive right like most people aren't
like oh they would be awesome for me to
have 20 new obligations this week
right and the reason is because that
that feels like oppressive and the idea
that money is an obligation oppressive
is so prevalent that the idea of loving
it is so confusing or so foreign it's
like but I can love everything else but
just not money right and and so and so
then since you can't love the money then
like why do you want it in your life
like if you're if
you if if money is this oppressive
obligation like that's doesn't really
motivate you to make it like you might
say oh my God I want money I want money
but you're not going to actually made it
make it if it's this impress oppressive
obl
obligation thing that cuts off your love
like what like f like we're not wired to
to to feel obligated and cut off from
love that's not like that's not our
wiring so yeah so so it's it's
inadvertently pushing money away and
that's what happens with almost all
forms of obligation is that that sense
of obligation in some level pushes it
away it pushes away the love that we
want it pushes away the money if we're
feeling obligation towards that um uh
one of the things you said in podcasting
so if you feel an obligation to perform
a certain way on this
podcast it's going to take away your
love of doing the podcast it's going to
take away um probably to some degree
your performance on this particular
podcast because part of what we're here
doing is being in a certain way it's not
just talking words and making some sort
of sense out of them um and so so that's
another thing that it does and in jobs
one of the places that I see the most is
with
managers or owners and they just feel
like the sense of obligation like oh I
have to do this for this person I have
to do this for the customers I have my
boss that I have to do this for I have
the board that I have to do this for and
it just takes their love of the business
away and when you look
at the entrepreneurs that are just
wildly success successful one of the
things I notice about it is they don't
have that sense of obligation they they
have a sense of like we're going to get
this done and and we're doing this but
they don't feel there it's there's a
feeling of I get to I want to I want to
build this business there's not this
feeling of I have to keep the customers
happy like and so so it also marks a
certain level of success because you're
getting in touch with what inspires you
to move forward instead of what
oppresses you to move forward and you
get to stay in touch with yourself
you're not stagnating your emotions
You're Not stagnating Your Love of the
experience and so you can go through you
have a lot more resilience if you love
what you're doing you have a lot more
resilience when [__] goes sideways than
if what you're doing is an obligation
then [__] goes sideways and you're like
[__] it I'm out yeah and any
entrepreneur who's been really
successful they will tell
you there was this moment when I was
going to quit when it all looked like
[__] you know what I mean and I kept
going and it's because oh yeah they they
didn't feel that they they did feel a
want they did feel they were connected
to their love of what they were
doing yeah something fascinating here
also is you describe so if if the
obligation is cutting us off from love
and love we've often described here as a
deep welcoming it's allowing a letting
in then we're also not letting in the
thing that we feel obligated to get so
if we're obligated to get money we're
not actually allowing ourselves to have
the money and then that leads to the
craving so often if you have somebody
who feels obligated to help everyone
around them they also often feel totally
unsupported and they're not letting in
the love and support of others and the
same with money if I'm obligated to make
money then I'm also setting myself up
for feeling really scarce around it and
craving it and then you know feeding the
resentment cycle that it is a that it is
some force in my life that I don't
have in some sense control over or like
whatever the whatever the story or the
feeling is there yeah it oppresses you
yeah I mean that's the that's the other
thing just to know about that is
obligation is is in its Essence a form
of management so there's not only a not
letting it in there's a pushing away of
it right things that we things don't
want to be managed you know like wow I
really like my wife because she manages
me you like it's not it's not something
that you hear very often you might say
oh they're a good manager but what that
means is that they give you autonomy and
appreciation that's what a good manager
like if some if I talk to someone
they're like I really love my manager
I'm like oh tell me about the autonomy
tell me about the appreciation because
that's usually not always but usually
what's there and um so but nobody really
wants to be manage we don't run towards
things that are like trying to control
us and trying to control us for a
particular outcome no it doesn't feel
particularly good and and that's that's
also what's happening when you're so so
the way this works in like a
interpersonal way
is I feel obligated to buy you something
so that you love me so I'm trying to
manage your love for me or I feel
obligated to take care of you and make
you happy so that you're not in a bad
mood when I get home or I feel oblig
just working with a client the other day
where it's like it's going to be good
we're all okay we're GNA get like
managing the person's anxiety out of a
sense of
obligation because they didn't want to
have to sit with the person's anxiety
but all that does is increase the
anxiety so there's a way in which like
if we're trying to like Our obligation
is to manage something like their good
mood we're pushing it away or if the
obligation is trying to manage
something um like someone loving us
we're pushing that away and so if you
look at like the Long Hall of
relationships you know that like
everybody's walking on eggshells
everybody feels obligated to do a
certain thing all the time so that they
can be loved and the marriage just the
the love erods so longterm the love
erods short term the love isn't even
available it's just only in that Medium
frame of time that you might get lucky
every once in a while yeah yeah there's
something this Springs up for me which
is somewhat related to each of the
things you've just mentioned um kind of
in in my history I got into Air Sports
and skydiving and Basse jumping and
Action Sports and I loved it and I
didn't want it to turn into an
obligation and so while there were a lot
of other people who were like I'm going
to become a professional instructor in
the sport I was like no I don't want to
do that I don't want it to become an
obligation and sap my love for the thing
so I always maintain my own separate
business that was in tech doing
something else and that way I always had
like a foot in either a foot out the
door essentially if I started to feel
obligated so that I could continue to
love it and on some level that really
worked it was quite smart of some part
of me to not fall into
the you know the treadmill of getting
YouTube likes and feeling obligated to
an audience and making dangerous
decisions from that place and there's
also a way that I kind of shut myself
off from a lot of paths that I could
have taken if I was just like all in on
doing what I loved and allowing myself
to make money doing it and be supported
by it and have that be all in one basket
there's a there's a different path that
could have been available to me had I
really allowed had I had I had freedom
across all of those different aspects
here and not been afraid of
obligation yeah so that it's interesting
because obligation is an emotional
experience it's not a reality meaning
like I know when I did a lot of Art and
knew a lot of artists back in the
90s some people got a job had a chance
to do it professionally and then they
felt obligated and then their love for
their art fell away and then they just
kind of bit the dust and some people
were like I [__] still love it I love
getting up and like playing rock and
roll or I love the painting that I'm
doing I feel so lucky that I get to do
it and in that even though there was an
obligation to make an album and to go on
tour it never felt like an obligation
right that it's that feeling of
obligation and so so for for me the
question to you would
be how how do you
imagine you could have continued in the
Air Sports
without feeling obligated
professionally yeah one way one way to
have done that would have been or one
way to have approached it would have
been just yeah I'm going to stay in my
love for this Sport and if it means that
I have opportunities to be
professionally involved or sponsored
then I'll follow those to the extent
that they feel good to me and if they
don't then I won't and you know just
because somebody starts writing checks
doesn't mean that they have any
that they have control or management
over me and yeah and if I make
agreements it doesn't mean that I'm
obligated in a in the sense like you
described like it's a re like it's not a
new reality for me it's an agreement and
I'm choosing to be
there that so that what you just said
there's two like really huge components
exactly that that allow an artist or
airports or whatever to do that is one
is to put every one of those things
through the frame of I get to choose
this do I want to do this or do I not
want to do it as soon it's like oh I
have to do it because I need the
money right so to just put it through
the frame of do I want
this is a huge thing and then the second
thing is saying no from time to time
really really helps like I get very very
deeply in touch with my want when I draw
boundaries right when I'm like yeah no I
can't work with you I won't work in this
company it's just like it be like I feel
this TR tremendous sense of of of
empowerment of I'm doing what I want to
be doing so those are great tools the
other thing about airports that I notic
is that there's also this other like
different kind of obligation that I've
noticed in fear generally is like so
you're at your exit Point you're looking
off the side of this Cliff or the side
of this telephone pole or whatever or
whatever uh radio tower
whatnot there's almost a feeling of
obligation to jump for some people I
would oh yeah often that happens yeah so
curiosity STS like how does how does
this pattern play out there but gets cut
off like
yeah yeah I mean on some level it
depends on what we feel the obligation
to I might feel the obligation to my
jumping partners and the plans we have
for the day and whether or not they're
going to have to wait for me at the car
if I walk down um it might be obligation
to some expectation for myself so there
might be an obligation to like a
parental figure or a um Mentor figure
from childhood that I'm not
recognizing
um
and and as far as how how that relates
to love there is very clearly I'm
cutting myself off from love for myself
if I make a decision that is taking me
outside of my risk tolerance in order to
please somebody else even if they're
just an imagined entity in my head that
doesn't actually exist a representation
of society and Bond movies for example
yeah and I'm also not loving the people
that I'm with if I am contributing to a
group dynamic where each of us is subtly
taking a couple steps away from what's
true for us
to uh to do what we project the group
wants Without Really checking in on it
so that's the other thing that I think
is interesting is in
general cutting off your experience of
Love Like Love is Like if you the the
feeling of love which
is I would argue is a natural state
right like there's like there's just
there's a very natural
like um expansive State not to say
anything else is unnatural but there's
this very it's it's just a way to
explain it it's very natural state love
and when you cut up from love you have
to
constrict the musculature in the body
like it's less expansive it's less open
and you also have to cut yourself off
from other senses right because there's
like this very kind of soft open
expansive system and my my guess is not
having done that kind of sport but like
having done like live performance and
stuff like that if I am in
that expansive State then I can react to
and adjust for and be responsive to
things in my environment that I can't be
if I'm in a more contracted
more rigid State yeah absolutely and and
in in airsports in particular you're
flying your body through the air and if
you are rigid if you are tense you're
far more likely to
be kind of flopping around in a form
that we call potato chipping um like
you're dropping like a potato chip out
of the sky that's like the you know the
worst case form of it it's typically
like beginners do this while they're
just learning and the thing they need to
learn to not do it is to be able to
relax so so to the extent that you have
these tensions whether they're conscious
or subconscious that does inhibit Your
Capacity to feel and notice and be
present in the moment and respond to
what's happening and on a jump or Wings
suit flight that is extremely dangerous
and the same flight that might have been
perfectly safe for you to make in a in a
relaxed state where you're like you said
self-loving and also in like welcoming
of all of the sensations in your body
and not tensing against them the same
jump could become far more dangerous
simply because there's obligation
running in the back of your brain stem
yeah it's I love that potato chipping
it's like it's it's like seems like such
a
great way to describe somebody who's
like caught in their head too
yeah or caught in a decision like oh
should I buy the car or not buy the car
should like flip-flopping you know yeah
that's another expression of the same
thing often right that's
cool yeah yeah so that that's so it I
think that the reason the reason I love
the question so much is because people
often like put obligation towards like
somebody else my obligation towards but
there's an obligation you have towards
yourself
obligation to business obligation
towards money obligation towards art
oblig you know it hit it it it happens a
lot of places and the place we haven't
really touched on is the obligation to
self so if you have a critical voice in
your head and like our think we have an
episode on this you're constantly
telling yourself to do something you're
often doing it out of obligation because
you're like not really questioning the
voice in your head you're taking that
all on and and and the same thing
happens there you have to cut off love
from yourself you have to cut off
self-love if you're acting out of
obligation towards the self-abuse self
the self uh
management so it's the same it's the
same thing and and and you're pushing
yourself away from yourself and you're
and you're and you're not able to accept
the love that's actually there so it's
all all of that also happens just in
your relationship to yourself as yeah
yeah that makes me want to ask if we
were if we were completely free of
obligation how would we know if we're
acting from love rather than some other
pattern you know people are often like
well if I wasn't obligated I would just
be selfish self-serving I wouldn't help
people I would and that's one of the
things that people will say to
themselves to keep gripping onto the
pattern right and I'm curious to what
extent is there some wisdom there if we
had no obligation whatsoever
how
would say again no emotional no sense of
emotional obligation would we what I'm
hearing you say is if you had no sense
of emotion the emotion of obligation
yeah would you cease to act in anything
but radical self-interest yeah or or how
would you know that what is there in the
wake of that is love and not
another kind of confused pattern around
around love yeah so that's a great
question I mean I would love to jump
inside of like a dog's head for a minute
and and like see if they actually say I
really should do this like as a form of
obligation because other mammals take
tremendous amount of
action uh without any sense of
obligation so I I definitely don't think
it's required for Action um but then
then there's a question of would I be
nothing but
self-interested
um what I find interesting is that if
you
scan the world and you're like okay who
has the deepest sense of obligation like
people who feel like really obligated
really obligated to be good or to be
smart or to go to the job or to make the
money and and are they like is that are
they the like the paragons of
love like you know so so I think there's
just just some evidence out in the world
that shows that they're not particularly
correlated um the feeling of obligation
Andor getting things done particularly
like in the case of the CEO that we
spoke about um or business being busy
you can be extremely busy and not feel
obligated absolutely right um yeah so
and I I would also argue like this is a
great intellectual conversation to have
but emotionally you have to cut off love
to allow for obligation so if you think
that what's going to make you a bad
person is cutting off the experience of
loving
somebody then like I would say go
experiment find out if it's true find
out if you walk
around like allowing yourself to feel a
deep love for everybody if you become a
if you become a worse self selfish
self-involved person like this is back
to the like the selfishness episode of
that we talked about where it's just
like that idea of selfishness is just
something that our parents whoever told
us as a way to make us not listen to
ourselves and do what they
wanted yeah it's not
yeah yeah this is making me think of a
conversation I had with my brother over
the holidays and he was he was
describing having a family because you
know I'm on the verge of potentially
having a family and he said something
I've noticed is that the more busy I
become with family with work with
business the more I just have been
finding myself enjoying it like the more
I love my life the more busy I
become
and that really hit me as as a reality
somebody can live in but also as like
something coming from my brother from my
family and you know of
course dissolving some of my perceptions
that I've had in the past
around what it would mean to have kids
and settle down rather than gallivant
around the world and jump off of cliffs
and party all the time and uh and
there's no part of him that felt to me
to be obligated in a reality of
obligation as he said that but what I
felt was was it just a deep
love yeah yeah there's another
experience of this like I remember this
in college I also remember this I see
this with my
eldest like if she's got a little bit of
work to do around stuff then she's like
feels obligated to do it more likely
feel obligated to do it more likely to
wrestle with the doing of it but if
she's stacked if she's like okay I'm
taking four AP classes and I have to
like apply for college which is all just
what happened then all she had is just
do the next thing there's no time for
the sense of
obligation and she'll say h It Feels So
empowering I feel so powerful I feel so
competent and it's and it and to some
degree it's because literally there was
no time to like feel obligated because
there was no time to like back off you
just were doing one thing doing
obviously that's not sustainable for and
and to be healthy for an ex to extended
period of time but there is this rhythm
that's important and part of a good
rhythm is that there's you know there's
not a lot of room for
obligation for that feeling of
obligation which often happens as a way
to try to motivate ourselves out of a
procrastination right we're we're we're
we're giving ourselves obligation as a
way to try to motivate ourselves to
manage
ourselves yeah it seems like that what
you just said Choice can play into as
well where if we are thinking about all
the different things we might do
then the option that we chose or we find
ourselves in can often feel far more
obligated or we feel more obligation
around it if we're if we're avoiding
feeling the fear of missing out on
everything else and so there there seems
to be something about the kind of what
people describe as the tragedy of choice
or the oh interesting yeah that seems to
be related too I agree yeah it's also
why the no becomes such a powerful and
empowering thing is that that no because
it's you're cutting off that choice or
you're making you're making the choice
and so it's not like I'm confronted with
it it's I've made it yeah yeah yeah one
thing that no does is bring that back
into our own agency so I don't get to
say that I'm being dragged around by
life I'm choosing it and so I can choose
to do something different next time yeah
so and there's something scary about
that empowerment also to to take that
responsibility it's very alive yeah
right it's very not cut off yeah
obligation is very like deadens it it is
cut off yeah
yeah so we've talked about obligation
being a way that people cut themselves
off from love they cut off the
love what other what are other ways that
people cut themselves off from
love wow I think
it's I think the easiest way to think
about it
is Maybe I'm Wrong I would have to test
this Theory but let's put it out there
as a theory which
is
um any strategy you use to get love in a
way Cuts yourself off from
love so I'm going to try to be powerful
to get love I'm trying to you
know trying to be trying trying in
itself as a way to kind of cut off from
love so there there's I think that might
be a really great I'm I'm just checking
to see if that's true I don't see a way
that that's not
true so there's a way in and and I the
way I would describe it
there's this gets a little bit weird but
I I love that one of my favorite phrases
is the search for light requires
Darkness um the search for love requires
lack of
love right you actually have to cut
yourself off from love instead of see
the love that you have in this moment to
recognize the love in in a weird way I
would say that that's
like a way to describe potentially the
entire journey of the Journey of like of
unconditional love is that
you think that it's not there you think
you have to do something to earn it you
think you have to like eat a certain
thing or act a certain way or have a
certain amount of money or whatever it
is your particular thing
is and then at some point there's this
just recognition that nope Love's just
available it's like the It doesn't
require anything besides not cutting it
off but if you're looking for it then
you cut it off so I would say
that's that would be and there's so
probably there's a thousand different
ways to do that so there's a thousand
ways to describe how we cut ourselves
off from love yeah I like the way you
just described that path as like the
looking is the cutting ourselves off
from love and I imagine
there's to get back to that love there's
the grief grieving that that's been the
case all along oh yeah oh yeah there is
and just to be clear there's a
difference between looking and assuming
it's there
like like I'm not saying like oh see see
the love that's there is not a looking
it's like it's when it becomes in time
when it becomes I have to do x y Z for I
have to blank for love rather than oh I
I can just see the love that's available
even I have to find myself or I have to
love myself more exactly I have to be
awake or whatever the [__] is yeah yeah
awesome thank you Joe what a pleasure
great than everybody for
listening uh if you like this episode
please share it with a friend find us on
X at Art of a comp and Joe and I also
have accounts up there and check out the
show notes we are going to link to some
of the other episodes that we referenced
and uh I hope you enjoyed the show take
care awesome all right bye